# PathLossPredicton
Wireless Network Optimization Using Path Loss Prediction with Machine Learning

 
 Zeynep Öykü Erdem 
SRH Heidelberg University 
Transmission Technology 
 Heidelberg,Germany
zeynepoykuerdem@outlook.com

 
  Abstract— Path Loss refers to the latency in signal strength as it transmits through the wireless channel. Path Loss can be caused by factors such as distance, frequency, obstacles and environmental conditions. Accurate path loss prediction plays a significant role in enhancing the performance of wireless networks. With the new development and deployment of the fifth generation and for upcoming sixth generation mobile communication systems, more accurate and lower complex path loss prediction model should be determined. In this study, classical methods such as the Free Path Loss Model, COST-231, are employed to provide theoretical and mathematical foundation for the path loss and to generate data sets. The principles of machine learning based path loss prediction are introduced, these datasets are used to evaluate the performance of different models, Support Vector Regression, Multi-Layer Perceptron Regressor, and Random Forest. The results demonstrate that these machine-learning-based models significantly outperform the traditional log-distance model in accuracy and reliability. 
Keywords: path loss prediction, machine learning algorithm, wireless network, neural network
I.	INTRODUCTION 
A.	The growing Importance of Wireless Networks
       Wireless Networks are becoming increasingly crucial in modern society, offering seamless connectivity, mobility and driving technological innovation. The widespread adoption of smartphones, tablets, wearable devices, IoT devices had led to a growing demand for reliable, high-speed wireless connectivity. Technologies such as Wi-Fi, 4G, and 5G not only provide internet access, especially in areas where wired infrastructure is limited but also enable remote education and work. Furthermore, the most important factor of Wireless networks when comparing with Wired Systems is easier deployment and scaling, making dynamic and temporary applications, allows fast advancements in cutting edge technologies, augmented reality (AR), virtual reality (VR), and autonomous systems. The upcoming 5G networks are expected to address several challenges by offering wide coverage, improved connection density, reduced radio latency and enhanced spectral efficiency [1] .Additionally, supporting IoT applications will enable broader coverage across diverse terrains and environments [1].

B.	The impact of path loss on network performance
       In the growing demand for Wireless networks, Path Loss is a considerable challenge to be addressed. Path Loss is the attenuation of signal during the transmission between transmitter and receiver. High Levels of Path Loss can reduce the signal quality, increase latency and lower data transmission. Path Loss can be resulted by several factors, such as distance between transmitter and receiver, the height of transmitter antenna, the height of receiver antenna, the frequency of the transmitted signal and the environment constructions Predicting this loss is a crucial task for resource allocation and network planning for upcoming cutting-edge technologies, including 5G Advancements, to improve data transmission. [2]

C.	The limitations of traditional methods
       Traditional Methods to predict Path Loss in terms of reliability and accuracy are limited, as they rely on simplified environment such as uniform terrain or ideal propagation. However, there are various factors to be considered when predicting path loss like urban clutter, building density, tree density. These factors cannot be captured by the traditional models. Additionally, the computational requirements of deterministic models are often impractical for large-scale applications. The Cost 231 model is a commonly used empirical model, that provides simplified formulas based on distance, frequency, and other parameters. [2]However, its categorization of environmental density is limited in two categories: medium-small sized city, metropolitan city. Moreover, their limitations in scalability, adaptability and accuracy make them less effective in addressing demand for network environments.
D.	The role of machine learning in addressing these challenges
       With the improvements in machine learning, the use of data-driven approaches has been explored to improve path loss prediction accuracy. Machine Learning algorithms, such as Random Forest Regression (RFR), Support Vector Regression (SVR) and Multi-Layer Perceptron Regressor (MLPR) are used to predict more accurate predictions compared to traditional models. The algorithms can learn and analyze large datasets, corporation with various factors effecting path loss. They can be trained by synthetic data, which is generated by the empirical model, COST 231.

Random Forest Regression (RFR) is an ensemble learning method that combines the predictions of multiple decision trees trained over the same data set to find more predictive results. Providing strong predictions by handling the complex relationships between the path loss and input variables. 
Support Vector Regression (SVR) can handle large datasets without introducing complexity. SVR predicts both continuous and discrete variables by transforming input features into higher dimensional spaces which allows to capture complex relationships between variables.
Multi-Layer Perceptron Regressor (MLPR) can handle nonlinear relationship between input variables and output variables, allowing multiple hidden layers to understand complex relationships. [2]

E.	The purpose and contributions of the study
       The purpose of this study to compare the performances of RF, SVR and MLPR by using metrics such as MSE and R² scores to demonstrate the effectiveness of these models in predicting path loss and optimizing wireless network performance. 
       
II.	METHODOLOGY
A.	Simulation Environment
 In this study, we simulate a synthetic small urban environment to model the path loss prediction shown in Figure 1. The simulation incorporates various factors including building density, tree density, distance between receiver and transmitter, transmitter height, receiver height. The synthetic environment has a grid size of 1000 x1000, with the base station locations positioned at the center of the grid. The locations of the receivers, trees, buildings, positions are randomly distributed. The environment is designed to reflect the characteristics of a small urban area, ensuring the reliability of simulation results, for detailed implementation, see Appendix A, Figure 6,7, and 8.

Fig 1.  Synthetic Small Urban Environment
B.	Data Expansion Process
 The basic machine learning based path loss prediction is shown in Fig 2. To improve the accuracy and generalizability of the model, COST 231 Hata Empirical Model is used for the data expansion to generate training datasets. It has been shown that the path loss is more dramatic at the frequencies in the 1800-2000 Mhz band, the COST 231 Hata model improves the Hata’s model for use in 1500-2000 Mhz for detailed implementation, see Appendix A, Figure 9.


Fig 2. Principle Machine Learning Path Loss Prediction
Cost 231 Hata Model can be written as follow:
 (1)
Where:
•	f is frequency, Mhz,
•	hb is the antenna height of base station, m
•	R is distance, km

Where a(hm) and factor Cm is defined as in equation
[1.1log10 (f) –0.7] hm – [1.56log10 (f) –0.8] (2)
where Cm=0, hm is the antenna height of receiver, m [3]


C.	Data Processing
Before applying machine learning algorithms, the collected data undergoes data preprocessing to ensure its suitability for model training. This includes scaling data and handling missing values. After scaling dataset, splitting datasets into training set and test set typically in 80/20 ratio to ensure that the model has enough data to train from, while also reserving a portion of the data for the unseen data for detailed implementation, see Appendix A, Figure 11,12. The random_state parameter is used to ensure the data split is reproducible, to avoid new data sets results in each time.

D.	Algorithms: SVR, MLPR, Random Forest
For path loss prediction, we apply three different machine learning algorithms: Support Vector Regression (SVR), Multi-Layer Perceptron Regressor (MLPR), and Random Forest.
Random Forest is an ensemble technique that combines multiple decision trees to predict numerical values as illustrated in Figure 3. To improve the performance of the algorithms, Hyperparameter Tuning is used to find the best parameters in given datasets training for detailed implementation, see Appendix A, Figure 12,13, and 14.SVR have ability to model complex, nonlinear and linear relationships Kernel parameter enables to use different types of kernel functions, such as linear, polynomial and radial basis function, to transform t input data into higher dimensional spaces while MLPR is used for complex nonlinear relationships.


Fig 3. Random Forest Regression Model Diagram

The basic Support Vector Regression (SVR) model is represented by the equation:
f(x)= wT ϕ(x)+ b (3) [4]
Where:
•	f(x) is the predicted output.
•	w is the weight vector.
•	ϕ(x) is the kernel-transformed input.
•	b is the bias term.
The optimization problem in SVR is given by:
Min ½ ∣∣w∣∣^2+ C ∑N(ξi+ξi∗) (4) [5]
•	∣∣w∣∣2 is the regularization term.
•	C is the regularization parameter
•	ξi and ξi∗ are the slack variables for errors

In MLP regression, the input variables calculated with weights, proceed through the  hidden layers to learn complex relationships between input and output variables as shown in Figure 5.
 
Fig 5 The basic Illustration of MLP Regression

E.	Performance Metrics: MSE, R²
       To evaluate the performance of the models, two key metrics are used: Mean Squared Error (MSE) and R-squared (R²). MSE measures the average squared difference between predicted and actual values, providing an indication of model accuracy. R-squared indicates the proportion of variance in the target variable that is explained by the model, offering insight into the model’s goodness of fit for detailed implementation, see Appendix A, Figure 13,14, and 15.


III.	EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
A.	Tools and Software
       The following table explains Python libraries were utilized to implement the path loss prediction models

TABLE 1: PYTHON LIBRARY AND FUNCTIONALITY

Library	Functionality
CSV	For reading and writing data in CSV format
NumPy	Efficient numerical operations and data handling
Pandas	Data preprocessing (handling missing values, normalizing features)
Matplotlib	Data visualization, including plotting model results
SciPy	Scientific computations and optimization routines
Scikit-learn	Machine learning implementation: 
- RandomForestRegressor 
- SVR 
- MLPRegressor 
- StandardScaler 
- train_test_split 
- GridSearchCV and RandomizedSearchCV 
- Evaluation metrics (MSE, R²)

IV.	RESULT AND DISCUSSION
TABLE 2 : PATH LOSS DATA CSV FILE
Receiver_X	Receiver_Y	Distance_to_Base_Station (m)	Transmitter Height	Receiver Height	Base_Station_Frequency (GHz)	Path_Loss_COST_231 (dB)
130	182	0.137927517	30	10	1800	84.45447742
32	328	0.231534015	30	10	1800	90.57879779
325	136	0.136458785	30	10	1800	84.79070232
465	359	0.241051862	30	10	1800	91.69508085
391	336	0.165157501	30	10	1800	87.16073021
118	280	0.13536617	30	10	1800	84.11771972
344	116	0.16368262	30	10	1800	87.02350352
392	314	0.15575622	30	10	1800	86.41415535
328	195	0.095441081	30	10	1800	79.82147462
462	457	0.296298836	30	10	1800	94.25191323
14	16	0.332343196	30	10	1800	95.35811348
37	356	0.237918053	30	10	1800	90.94489474
386	146	0.171207476	30	10	1800	87.5610983
188	148	0.119364986	30	10	1800	82.54327354
181	53	0.208734281	30	10	1800	89.89293876
230	128	0.123628476	30	10	1800	83.28015534
471	17	0.321138599	30	10	1800	94.9334645
464	415	0.270223981	30	10	1800	93.19270565
476	239	0.226267541	30	10	1800	91.0768118

Fig 4. Comparison of MSE and R² for SVR Models

      After the machine learning algorithms are implemented to datasets as observing the Figure 4, we determined that Random Forrest Regression demonstrated the lowest training MSE and maintained relatively low test MSE which indicates good performance, The R² score for RF was also the highest, confirming its ability in this small urban area to capture complex relationships. Support Vector Regression showed moderate training MSE and highest test MSE. The R² score was lower than RF and MLR, indicating its struggles with overfitting. MLP Regressor shows better test MSE than SVR and better R². However, due to the limited datasets, it may not generalize as effectively as Random Forest. Nevertheless, it performs significantly better than SVR.  In Conclusion, Random Forest is the best performing model for this dataset, if we can provide larger datasets SVR and MLP Regressor performs better with their incorporation with complex relationship
V.	CONCLUSION

 In Conclusion, this project concludes that the Random Forest algorithm is the most effective for path loss prediction in small urban environments, offering the highest accuracy and robustness. By Using Python Libraries, NumPy, Pandas, Matplotlib, Scipy, Sklearn allows to generate the datasets and implement machine learning algorithms to predict path loss values while comparing the model performance. Looking ahead, for future advancements for path loss predictions should focus on cutting edge, high-speed technologies to meet increasing demands,  Additionally, Neural Network Algorithms should be explored for more accurate and precise predictions. However, achieving this would require larger and more diverse datasets for effective training and result

REFERENCES

[1]	Zhang, Y., Wen, J., Yang, G., He, Z., & Wang, J. (2019). Path Loss Prediction Based on Machine Learning: Principle, Method, and Data Expansion. Applied Sciences, 9(9), 1908. https://doi.org/10.3390/app9091908
[2]	Wondimneh Ademe (2023), Comparative Study of Machine Learning Techniques for Path Loss Prediction, Addis Ababa University
[3]	Singh Yuvraj (2012), Comparison of Okumura, Hata and COST-231 Models on the Basis of Path Loss and Signal Strength, International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887) Volume 59– No.11
[4]   Vapnik, V. (1995). The Nature of Statistical Learning Theory. Springer-Verlag
[5]   Montgomery, D. C., Peck, E. A., & Vining, G. G. (2012). Introduction to Linear Regression Analysis (5th ed.). Wiley
